# siRNA

Small interference RNAs (siRNAs) have emerged as pivotal molecular systems in the fields of therapy and diagnostics due to their regulatory roles in gene expression. Their design is complex due to various factors influencing their activity, including chain length, mismatches, and chemical modifications. These factors exert complex effects on the activity of siRNA therapies, which can complicate their design and application. The experimental design of siRNAs presents a substantial combinatorial challenge, as current methodologies lack versatile design rules. Machine learning (ML) has significantly advanced siRNA research, enabling more efficient and accurate analysis of siRNA data, particularly in predicting efficacy and off-target effects. Existing studies primarily rely on statistical representations of sequences that consider only nucleotide context, often failing to account for the chemical properties of nucleotides as well as modified nucleotides. Consequently, models developed on such bases require extensive datasets to converge towards sufficient predictive accuracy. This work proposes a novel method for predicting gene knockout activity of chemically modified siRNAs using ML leveraging descriptors of siRNA chemical composition with convolutional autoencoder (CAE) architecture. Model, based on Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM), achieves a Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) as small as 13.8% in activity evaluation on unseen systems, demonstrating its strong predictive capabilities. By filling the gap in the field of advanced chemical composition-aware siRNA design, our model aims to improve the efficacy and specificity of siRNA-based therapies.

Figures contains code for any visualisation of figures in article, except the regression plot. He located in the end of the regression file .py
Dataset contains variable dataset versions that you can obtain during cleaning and unification
Regressor contains files aimed to develop the final model and compared the descriptors and models
Unified_data contains notebook and other files that make it possible to obtain final version for dataset
Classifier contains code for 2 types of classifiers. Here we build and optimise our model 
 
